---
title: Tips for Beginning Coders
date: 05 Mar 2022
---

When college responsibilities aren't bothering me much, and I have some free time, I spend it going through beginner's forums and websites for programming. No - not StackOverflow. Mostly subreddits and a few Facebook groups. There are a few things that pop up from these groups repeatedly that I want to address in this post.

Now, I have been coding since 2017, but I haven't practiced professionally, so these tips won't focus on those. These tips will also be language agnostic, so don't think these tips may not be for you. Instead, I want to answer some questions that keep on appearing and tell you how you can be a better coder.

## TIP 1: Learn how to ask a proper question

The biggest sin I see from all these forums is asking a question that is, "Just solve this for me for free." If you're a beginner, know that you might get a ban if you do this or even imply it in some communities. Some forums and websites have rules that ban members from offering complete solutions. This is to prevent college students from getting free homework.

Aside from this, I see vague questions all the time. I commonly go on Reddit a lot, and there are definitely a lot of post titles that go:

- Help?
- This has been on my mind lately.
- Why does this not work?

It's annoying. I have to open the post to see whether I can help. Sometimes I can, but sometimes it's not.

What's more? The body has improperly formatted code. Instead of something nice like this:

```Python
def logger(func):
    def wrapper():
        print(f"Logging function {func}")
        func()
    
    return wrapper()


@logger
def sample_function(string: str):
    return string * 2


hello_twice = sample_function("Hello")
print(hello_twice)
```

You get something like this:

[START]

def logger(func):
    def wrapper():
        print(f"Logging function {func}")
        func()
    
    return wrapper()


@logger
def sample_function(string: str):
    return string * 2


hello_twice = sample_function("Hello")
print(hello_twice)

[END]

This looks really bad and is hard to parse. I don't expect a beginner to know the proper terms (e.g., lambda functions, objects, or decorators), but I want to see what you want to achieve. Here are some rules for asking a reasonable question:

1. Format your code correctly. If you're on a forum dedicated to coding, trust me - there is a way to make sure your sample code doesn't look horrible. If there's none, or you're not sure, [use Pastebin to share your code](https://pastebin.com/). Never ever share an image of your code. It's hard to parse, and if your code is long enough, it's a pain to go through all the photos. Stick with text as much as possible. (**NOTE**: Some forums disallow Pastebin, so read the rules before using it, but these forums ALWAYS have a way of adequately sharing your code).
2. When making a title, be clear about what you want. Don't say "Help me" or a variation. If you're unsure, indicate what you want to achieve.
3. Unless you're asking on a language-specific sub, indicate the language. For example, if you want to know how to do matrix multiplication in Python, show so unless you're in the r/learnpython subreddit.
4. Show us what you did already. Don't ask or imply to ask for a complete solution. Sometimes, you don't know how to start, and that's fine, but show me what you're confused about. If you don't know how to solve the roots of a number, I won't give you the code for it. Instead, I'll give you algorithms for it.
5. It's okay not to know specific terms. However, if you want to know the proper naming, use line numbers to indicate so. For example, in the example above, you could say, "What does @logger mean at line 9, and what does it do?"
6. Some questions are naturally up for debate, and sometimes, you won't get a clear answer. For example, the answer to tabs vs. spaces is just, "Whatever you like, or your company prefers." Don't waste time getting a proper response to a question that doesn't have one.

Lastly, I'll address a ubiquitous question: If you don't understand a piece of code, go through it line by line. Explain what the code does and why you need it. Try to change some things and tell yourself what that will do. For example, if you're trying to make a Fibonacci sequence, what will happen if you make the starting numbers -1 and 0? Do this repeatedly until you can write the code down without Googling (except for syntax).

## TIP 2: The programming language you start with is very dependent on what you want to do

Another common question I hear from general subreddits is, "What language should I start with?" Anytime you hear this question asked, the following comment will definitely say, "Well, what do you want to build?"

If you want to build iOS apps, Swift. If you're aiming for game development, C++. If you're going to dominate the front-end, it's JavaScript. If you're looking to be a data scientist, Python or R. If it's embedded systems, C or C++. It's hard to answer this question because it requires more info.

But what if you don't know what to build? Then start with Python. Here's why:

- Python is a general-purpose language. It can be used for web development, scripts, data science, desktop app development, game development, and many more. It's not usually the first choice, but it can be used almost anywhere.
- Python has a vast community that's generally beginner-friendly. It's one of the most popular programming languages, so if you have a question related to it, you'll likely find someone who needs it.
- Python (in my opinion) is easier to learn than most languages. It has a syntax close to the English language, so sometimes it feels like you're writing prose.

Now, let me just say that you do not need to learn Python if you have already picked a language. As I said, the programming language you choose is HIGHLY dependent on what you want to do. However, Python is a good choice if you do not know what to do.

Then I'll address another equally annoying question, "Why don't we just use [X] programming language for everything?" [This StackExchange answer is the best, so I'll just repeat it](https://softwareengineering.stackexchange.com/questions/4889/why-cant-there-be-an-universal-programming-language-that-serves-all-purposes): For the same reason you don't use a [Swiss army knife](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Swiss_Army_knife) to carve a chicken.

## TIP 3: The tools you use don't matter as much as you think

Yes. You don't have to use VS Code, Vim, or Emacs to be a "real developer." You can use Notepad++ if you want. You don't need a Mac or use Linux to be a developer. You don't need headphones or a standing desk or whatever to code. You don't need to accustom yourself to dark mode if you prefer the light side. You just need a device that lets you code.

The tools you use can change over the years. I went from Atom to Brackets to Dreamweaver to Notepad++ to Sublime Text to VS Code before settling on JetBrains IDEs today. These are primarily for preferential reasons.

Switching tools is easy. Focus on learning how to code over picking the best theme or font. Companies won't care that you use Notepad to code or use Comic Sans as long as you can deliver what they want.

Furthermore, you don't need a Mac or Linux to be a developer. I have used Ubuntu before, and I know it can be much easier. Still, some people overstate how hard it is to use Windows for programming. (One notable exception is for iOS development. Unless something changed, you do need a Mac for that).

Focus on learning how to code in the beginning. Focus on understanding the logic, writing better git commits, and writing clean code before worrying that you don't use Arch Linux.

## TIP 4: Read those errors

This could be addressed in Tip 1, but I see it enough that I want to address it: Read those errors. Too many times do I see a variation of the following:

[START]

**TITLE**: Why does my program output this error?

I'm trying to do the fizzbuzz problem, but my browser keeps saying something's wrong. Why?

```javascript
for (lt i = 0; i <= 100; i++) {
    if ((i % 3 === 0) && (i % 5 === 0)) {
        console.log("Fizzbuzz");
    } else if (i % 3 === 0) {
        console.log("Fizz");
    } else if (i % 5 === 0) {
        console.log("Buzz");
    } else {
        console.log(i);
    }
}
```

Here's what they are saying:

```
Uncaught SyntaxError: Unexpected identifier
```

Why?

[END]

It's so hard not to be mad at the person who asked the question. Errors don't just pop up because they hate you. Read them. I am constantly surprised by beginners who never read errors and brute force their way into solving things.

Sometimes, those Syntax Errors can look invisible. There was a time when my program outputted a Syntax Error, but I couldn't find it after 30 minutes. It was only after a friend told me that I used a colon (:) instead of a semicolon (;) that I finally solved it. But at least I knew the problem wasn't in the logic - that's the key. That's why you should read errors as they tell you where to look first.

## TIP 5: Avoid sympathy chasing

There is another thing I notice a lot on beginner's forums. It goes along the lines of:

- I still don't understand how to code. Am I stupid?
- I want to drop out of CS. It's so tricky. I don't think I can take this anymore.
- I still didn't get a job 3 months after my Bootcamp. Am I doomed to fail?
- I just got a job for $ 250k a year with benefits. I think it's so horrible.
- I'm 18. Is it too late to learn to code?

If you are planning to ask them, STOP. Just don't. It's a pain to see, and at this point, I'm numb to it as well as a lot of other people. The reason is that first, you're in a coding forum - not a mental health support forum. Second, if you don't like coding, stop.

Coding isn't for everyone. I don't know who told everyone that everyone needs to code, but they should stop. Coding will indeed open up opportunities and can be immensely valuable in real life, but so is statistics. The thing is, if you're coding to get a good job and that alone with no real drive, and no curiosity, you will hit a wall.

Many people struggle with loops - I've seen it personally. A lot of people struggle with higher concepts such as classes. Coding isn't easy. I still encourage people to try coding as it's a straightforward hobby to break into, but I also tell them that it's okay to stop if they find out it's not for them. It doesn't mean that you're stupid, less worthy, or whatever. It just means you don't like coding.

And yet, people still try. For what? I've seen people that basically go, "Programming makes me want to die and I refuse to put in the work. How do I not do it?" As someone who loves programming, I just go, "Don't." If you're learning to program to get a job and you can't even put in the work due to the lack of motivation, you're going to hate it.

Yes. Your job won't be all sitting in a computer coding, but that's like saying firemen don't always put out fires. You should at least put up with something that people expect you to do.

---

I've been a beginner before, and I've encountered most of what I've said, so I do have some sympathy for people who ask them. When you're just starting out, it's hard to know what is right and wrong, especially without a mentor.

That's why my advice is to find a mentor if you can find one. If you can't, find a community. There are a lot of subreddits and Discord communities for programming. Try to engage in discussions by asking and answering questions. If you really can't, lurking in many communities can be incredibly helpful to see the opinions of everyone.
